Coming up next is the science fiction radio show, so stay with us.
This is the science fiction radio show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Carson.
For 40 years a high school science teacher in Massachusetts has been writing first class
science fiction, and in the early 1950s he published one of the classic novels in the
field.
That man is Harry C. Stubbs, better known as Hal Clement.
Though he's produced relatively few novels, Clement has a high reputation among his peers
and readers.
He writes solid, highly crafted pieces of literature, all with a characteristic Clement
trademark, scientific accuracy and realism.
He has a reputation as one of the best of all hard science fiction writers.
We asked him why he writes the way he does.
I'm not sure I'm a good enough psychoanalyst to answer that.
I just feel that I have trouble writing something unless I can more or less convince myself
that it might happen.
The best example, I guess, was my attempt a few years ago to write a story for an anthology
of vampire tales.
When I had finished it, I discovered that it was a science fiction story.
I counted for everything that happened on a scientific basis, and I wasn't happy about
it until I could account for them that way.
Clement's first story, entitled Proof, was published by the great science fiction editor
John W. Campbell in 1942.
Clement says that Campbell helped him a great deal, especially since the two of them have
similar ideas concerning science fiction.
We're both materialists, I guess.
We felt that the universe does run by rule, and we felt that a story was most believable
when it matched those rules, at least as we, we, meaning humanity in general, currently
understood them.
Clement's best known work, a genuine science fiction classic, is Mission of Gravity, published
serially by Campbell in the early 1950s.
His most recent novel, which came out in 1981, is Nitrogen Fix.
And his emphasis on hard science is obvious in the book.
It's a convincingly realistic account of what the earth might be like if all the oxygen
were removed from the atmosphere.
The result, he thinks, might be an atmosphere of nitrogen.
The idea itself does not know.
It was used many years ago in a story called The Mightiest Machine by John Campbell, which
someone invented a catalyst which permitted the direct combination of nitrogen and oxygen
to nitrogen pentoxide.
I was more careful quantitatively than John was.
He had the snowflakes of nitrogen pentoxide drifting out of the sky and bursting into
flame as they hit organic matter.
It oxidized it.
The red-brown gases that rose when the high oxides of nitrogen got reduced by other things
like organics and the streams fuming as the oxides of nitrogen boiled into them.
There's a very impressive book, beautiful adventure story.
But unfortunately, there isn't that much oxygen in the earth as an atmosphere.
You couldn't have made that much nitrogen pentoxide.
And I had to tone everything down a good deal and have the worst of it have happened in
the past and try to figure out what the final results would have been, or intermediate results
anyway, a couple of thousand years after things had started.
Clement explains how he got started writing science fiction 40 years ago.
Rather gradually, I was reading the stuff originally and started, I think, with the Buck Rogers
comic strip.
And I discovered there were magazines.
I began telling the stories that I'd read in magazines to friends on the grade school
playground and to boy scouts at campfires.
Then I began correcting some of the errors that I spotted in the stories and eventually
began trying to write my own.
He's been writing his own very successfully for a long while now.
Yet his total output is not great because he can't devote all his time to it.
It's been a hobby all along.
And in the last few years, there somehow seems to have been less and less time.
I've been doing more work connected with my profession of high school science teaching.
I'm currently president-elect of the New England Association of Chemistry Teachers.
I have an awful feeling that's going to take a lot of my time for the next two and a half
years.
Join us next time for more about Hal Clement.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science
Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next...
Next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson...
and Daryl Lane.
Nothing is more typical of popular science fiction than alien creatures, and no one is
more adept at inventing aliens than author Hal Clement.
If there were such a thing as an authority on aliens, Clement would certainly qualify.
Besides the weird creatures that turn up in his own work, he's written a fascinating
essay in the subject entitled The Creation of Imaginary Beings.
How does he go about developing the psychology of an alien creature?
I am not sure, first of all, that an intelligent being's psychology would be all that different
from the human one anyway.
It is going to depend on the being's motivation.
Presumably, the creature will be driven so as to survive.
He or she or it, or they, if they have several sexes, are going to have drives to find food,
to avoid pain.
If they do have sexes, they will have drives to use them, exercise them, and all of those
will tend to provide motivation recognizably similar to those of humanity.
Clement is a science teacher and a writer of very realistic science fiction.
Yes, and as you might expect, his aliens, as strange as they may be, are logically constructed
from sound scientific principles.
His mesclinite aliens, for instance, from the novel Mission of Gravity, live on a world
of extremely heavy gravity.
As a result, they are loaded to the ground and solidly built with many legs, similar to caterpillars.
Right, he always attempts to construct his aliens from the particular environment they exist in.
In other words, their world determines what they'll be like.
We asked Clement what he thought of aliens in science fiction movies.
How realistic are they?
I haven't seen by any means all of the movie science fiction things.
The one that was called Alien, I gather, was very impressive, but was so mostly by avoiding
detailed portrayal of his or its or her nature, which of course is a perfectly good trick.
I can't think of any alien I have seen in a movie who was really believable in character, believably alien.
There were several unnamed species in the bar scene in the first of the shows, the Star Wars,
where the scous was good, the arguing back and forth in a completely unintelligible language
produced a very impressive and funny scene.
But again, you can't really tell what the personalities of the creatures were like.
They were very much like drunks in a terrestrial bar.
I think a good job was done, but I wouldn't say they were really alien.
In response to those who say his own aliens are convincingly realistic in their psychology,
Clement reveals the secret of how he constructs them.
For those people who say that my aliens are noticeably alien, not human in psychology,
I'm afraid I have a rather cynical answer.
My secret for making a being seen non-human is to make him act rationally.
For example, I can be fairly specific about this one.
In the sequel to Mission of Gravity, Starlight, at one point I had one of my masternites driving one of these giant tanks
along a completely unknown territory, and nothing was happening.
He wanted to get somewhere, and he gradually began going a little faster and a little faster as a human being would do.
Then he suddenly realized what he was doing and slowed down again, which is of course the rational thing to do.
My own suspicion is that nine human beings out of ten would not have slowed down until they'd run into something.
We'll have more on Hell, Clement, tomorrow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Ames.
The April 1953 issue of Astounding Science Fiction contained the beginning of a serial which was to become a Science Fiction Classic.
The story is standard fare for Science Fiction, space exploration by Earthmen which results in contact with an alien culture.
What sets the novel apart from others of its type though is its hard science background.
The planet is called Mesclun, one of the most famous worlds in science fiction. We asked Clement how he developed it.
So I went to work. I am, as I say, a rather firm materialist. I have serious doubts and things like gravity screens, anti-gravity machines.
The only thing I could think of which would produce such a variation was rapid spin.
And this was before you could steal time on computers because they hadn't been invented.
I had a good deal of slide rule work and also some consultation with such astronomy texts as I could get hold of.
And I came up with what seemed to be a valid planet at the time.
Mesclun spins so rapidly that it's flattened to a disc shape and the gravity varies from three times that of Earth at the equator to 650 times at the poles.
Men from Earth have sent an exploratory probe to Mesclun's surface but they can't get it back because of the incredibly heavy gravity.
So they enlist the help of some native Mesclunites who resemble 15 inch long caterpillars.
The story itself is a fascinating one but equally fascinating as the scientific detail Clement provides a setting for the narrative.
The gravity is so heavy, for example, that a fall of a few inches would crush your mesculinite.
The mesculinites are so used to staying close to the ground that to see one of them climbing anything would drive the others mad.
Clement has written of something he calls the game by which he means a contest between writer and reader.
In the game a reader of a science fiction story tries to find statements or ideas which conflict with current science.
The writer, on the other hand, tries to make as few slips as he possibly can.
Clement says that a group of very intelligent readers played the game with mission of gravity.
Somebody was playing the game. I believe it was a group of members of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Science Fiction Society.
It's just for short. And they began taking Mesclun apart mathematically.
I understand from some of them the planet actually should come to a sharp edge at the equator instead of a smooth curve.
But I am not a good enough mathematician myself to check up on this point.
Clement wrote a sequel to Mission of Gravity which came out in 1970.
It's called Starlight and it continues this strange relationship between mesculinites and humans.
He explains why he did the sequel.
In a sense I was talked into it. I'm very uneasy about sequels and series stories in general.
My experience has been with reading them but I was always disappointed by the later ones.
I formed my opinion of what things were like and the later stories usually changed those opinions and disappointed me.
The Mission of Gravity sequel came as a result of a conversation.
I think at one of the New York conventions a fan said something and I can't now remember exactly what it was
which sounded like a good idea to use the Mastronites and I built it up from there.
Mission of Gravity is probably the best of all hard science fiction novels.
Any serious reader of science fiction should be familiar with it.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.